CRITERI DIAGNOSTICI E DIAGNOSI DIFFERENZIALE PER LO SPETTRO DELLA SCHIZOFRENIA

1.Delusional Disorder
Criteria: A) The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer. B) Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.
Note: Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the delusional theme(e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated with delusions of infestation).
C) Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not mark-edly impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.
D) If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief relative to the duration of the delusional periods.
E) The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition and is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Specify whether: Erotomanic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with the individual.
Grandiose type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is the conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or having made some important discovery.
Jealous type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the individual’s delu-sion is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful.
Persecutory type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion involves the individual’s belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals.
Somatic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion involves bodily functions or sensations.
Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief cannot be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g., referential delusions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).
Specify if: With bizarre content: Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible,not understandable, and not derived from ordinary life experiences (e.g., an individual’s belief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs and replaced them with someone else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars).
Specify if:The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder:
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet-ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time period in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episodeMultiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity: Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis SymptomSeverity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)Note: Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.
Differential diagnosis: Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders: If an individual with obsessive-compulsive disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, or hoarding disorder is completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive and related disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis is obsessive-compulsive disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, or hoarding disorder, respec-tively, with the specifier “with absent insight/delusional beliefs,” rather than delusional disorder.
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and psychotic disorder due to another medical condition: Individuals with these disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder. For example, simple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder would be diagnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with be-havioral disturbance.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder: A substance/medication-inducedpsychotic disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptomatology to delusional dis-order but can be distinguished by the chronological relationship of substance use to the on-set and remission of the delusional beliefs.
Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder: Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other characteristic symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia. Furthermore, the quality of delusion scan help distinguish between schizophrenia and delusional disorder. In schizophrenia,delusions show greater disorganization (the degree to which delusions are internally consistent, logical, and systematized), whereas in delusional disorder, they show greater con-viction (the degree to which the individual is convinced of the reality of the delusion), greater extension (the degree to which the delusion involves various areas of the individual’s life),and greater pressure (the degree to which the individual is preoccupied and concerned with the expressed delusion).
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder. These disorders maybe distinguished from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions oc-cur exclusively during mood episodes, the diagnosis is major depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. Mood symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be superimposed on delusional disorder. Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total duration of all mood episodes remains brief relative to the total duration of the delusional disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by other specified depressive disorder, unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and related disorder, or unspecified bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.

2.Brief Psychotic Disorder
Criteria: A) Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must be(1), (2), or (3): 1. Delusions 2. Hallucinations 3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence) 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior. Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response.
B) Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month, with eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
C) The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or catatonia,and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With marked stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in response to events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circumstances in the individual’s culture.
Without marked stressor(s): If symptoms do not occur in response to events that,singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circum-stances in the individual’s culture.
With peripartum onset: If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks postpartum.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis-order, p. 135, for definition).Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with brief psychotic disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis SymptomSeverity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)Note: Diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.
Differential diagnosis:
Other medical conditions) A variety of medical conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms of short duration. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or a de-lirium is diagnosed when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or lab-oratory tests that the delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological consequence of a specific medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, brain tumor)
Substance-related disorders) Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, sub-stance-induced delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psy-chotic disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure toa toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see “Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder” later in this chapter). Laboratory tests, such as aurine drug screen or a blood alcohol level, may be helpful in making this determination, asmay a careful history of substance use with attention to temporal relationships between substance intake and onset of the symptoms and to the nature of the substance being used.
Depressive and bipolar disorders) The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be made if the psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic symptoms occur exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode)
Other psychotic disorders) If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the diagnosis is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder with psychotic features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder and schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted be-fore 1 month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention shouldbe given to the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute ex-acerbations of schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes
Malingering and factitious disorders) An episode of factitious disorder with predomi-nantly psychological signs and symptoms may have the appearance of brief psychotic dis-order, but in such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced.When malingering involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence that the illness is being feigned for an understandable goal.
Personality disorders) In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial stressors may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usu-ally transient and do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at least 1 day, an additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.

3.Schizophreniform Disorder
Criteria: A) Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):1. Delusions 2. Hallucinations 3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence) 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior 5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition)
B) An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified as “pro-visional.”
C) Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic feature shave been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness
D) The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With good prognostic features: This specifier requires the presence of at least two of the following features: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4 weeks of the first noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning; confusion or perplexity;good premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence of blunted or flataffect.
Without good prognostic features: This specifier is applied if two or more of the above features have not been present.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder)
Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with schizophreniform disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis SymptomSeverity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)Note: Diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.
Differential diagnosis:
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of mental disorders and medical conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms that must be considered in the differential diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. These include psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder;substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or delirium; major depressive or bipo-lar disorder with psychotic features; schizoaffective disorder; other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder; major depressive or bipolar disorder with catatonic features; schizophrenia; delusional disorder; other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality dis-orders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in childhood with disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; obsessive-compulsive disorder; posttraumatic stress disorder; and traumatic brain injury.Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ primarily in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophrenia also applies to schizophreniform disorder.Brief psychotic disorder. Schizophreniform disorder differs in duration from brief psy-chotic disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month.

4.Schizophrenia
Criteria: A) Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):1. Delusions 2. Hallucinations 3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence) 4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior 5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B) For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of func-tioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care,is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in child-hood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
C) Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meetCriterion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptomslisted in Criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual percep-tual experiences).
D) Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic feature shave been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
E) The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
F) f there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of child-hood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia,are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet-ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a period of time during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be determined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a minimum of one relapse).
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder)
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)to 4 (present and severe).
Differential diagnosis:
Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features) The dis-tinction between schizophrenia and major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features or with catatonia depends on the temporal relationship between the mood disturbance and the psychosis, and on the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If delusions or hallucinations occur exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode,the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features.
Schizoaffective disorder) A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major depressive or manic episode occur concurrently with the active-phase symptoms and that the mood symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder) These disorders are of shorter duration than schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symptoms. In schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in brief psychotic disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
Delusional disorder) Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by the absence of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prom-inent auditory or visual hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or cata-tonic behavior, negative symptoms).
Schizotypal personality disorder) Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished from schizophrenia by subthreshold symptoms that are associated with persistent personality features.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders with poor or absent insight) When individuals are completely convinced that their obsessive-compulsive beliefs, body dysmorphicdisorder beliefs (e.g., defective physical appearance), or hoarding disorder beliefs (e.g., catastrophic consequences of discarding objects) are true, the specifier “with absent insight/delu-sional beliefs” applies. These disorders are distinguished from schizophrenia by the absence of the other required psychotic features (hallucinations, disorganized speech, disorganized or catatonic behavior, negative symptoms). Another important differentiating feature between schizophrenia and these disorders is that the latter are characterized by prominent obsessions or preoccupations and the compulsive (repetitive) behaviors that occur in response.
Posttraumatic stress disorder) Posttraumatic stress disorder may include flashbacks that have a hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilance may reach paranoid proportions. Buta traumatic event and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event are required to make the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders) These disorders may also have symptoms resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective defi-cits in social interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and communication deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disorder or communication disorder must have symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent hallucinations or delusions for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophrenia as a comorbid condition
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode) The diagnosis of schizo-phrenia is made only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a delirium or major or minor neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent with those disorders.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) Individuals with substance/medica-tion-induced psychotic disorder may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia, but the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the chronological relationship of substance use to the onset and re-mission of the psychosis in the absence of substance use.

5.Schizoaffective Disorder
Criteria: A) An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode (major depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.Note: The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed mood.
B) Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood epi-sode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness.
C) Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the majority of the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.
D) The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
F25.0 Bipolar type: This subtype applies if a manic episode is part of the presenta-tion. Major depressive episodes may also occur.
F25.1 Depressive type: This subtype applies if only major depressive episodes are part of the presentation.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis-order).Coding note: Use additional code F06.1 catatonia associated with schizoaffective disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet-ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the defin-ing criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be determined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a minimum of one relapse).
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods being very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)to 4 (present and severe).
Differential diagnosis:
Other mental disorders and medical conditions) A wide variety of psychiatric and med-ical conditions can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms and must be considered in the differential diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. These include delirium; major neurocognitive disorder; substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocog-nitive disorder; bipolar disorders, with psychotic features; major depressive disorder, with psychotic features; depressive or bipolar disorders, with catatonic features; schizotypal,schizoid, or paranoid personality disorder; brief psychotic disorder; schizophreniform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional disorder; and other specified and unspecified schizo-phrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition) Other medical conditions and substance use can manifest with a combination of psychotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychotic disorder due to another medical condition needs to be excluded.
Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders) Distinguishing schizoaffective dis-order from schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features is often difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective dis-order can be distinguished from a major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features based on the presence of prominent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, the psychotic features only occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appro-priate diagnosis may change from and to schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a diagno-sis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and prominent major depressive episode lasting4 months during the first 6 months of a chronic psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several years without a recurrence of another mood episode.) Achieving greater clarity about the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms over time and about their concurrence may require collateral information from medical records and from informants.

6.Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder
Criteria: A) Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:1. Delusions.2. Hallucinations.
B) There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both (1) and (2):1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxica-tion or withdrawal or after exposure to or withdrawal from a medication.2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Criterion A.
C) The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent psychotic disorder could include the following:The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence of an indepen-dent non-substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder (e.g., a history of re-current non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D) The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E) The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention
Differential diagnosis:
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal) Individuals intoxicated with stimulants, cannabis, the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alco-hol or sedatives, may experience altered perceptions that they recognize as drug effects. If reality testing for these experiences remains intact (i.e., the individual recognizes that the perception is substance induced and neither believes in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is notsubstance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or substance withdrawal, with perceptual disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxica-tion, with perceptual disturbances). “Flashback” hallucinations that can occur long after the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed sepa-rately. Delusions in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive disorder would be diagnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
Independent psychotic disorder) A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is distinguished from an independent psychotic disorder, such as schizophrenia, schizo-affective disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizo-phrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically re-lated to the symptoms.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition) A substance/medication-inducedpsychotic disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or medical condi-tion must have its onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if there is a withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with medical conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clini-cian must consider the possibility that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physio-logical consequences of the medical condition itself rather than the medication, in which case psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical condition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically for that individual whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is attributable to both a medical condition and sub-stance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another medical con-dition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) may be given.
Other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder) The psychotic symptoms included in the diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder are limited to either delusions or hallucinations. Individuals with other substance-induced psychotic symptoms (e.g., disorganized or catatonic behavior; disorganized speech; incoherence or irrational content) should be classified in the category other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.

7. Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Criteria: A) Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B) There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C) The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E) The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Code based on predominant symptom:
F06.2 With delusions: If delusions are the predominant symptom.
F06.0 With hallucinations: If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
Differential diagnosis:
Delirium and major or mild neurocognitive disorder) Hallucinations and delusions com-monly occur in the context of a delirium; a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is not given if the delusions and/or hallucinations occur exclusively during the course of a delirium. On the other hand, a diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major or mild neurocognitive disorder if the delusions or hallucinations are judged to be a physio-logical consequence of the pathological process causing the neurocognitive disorder (e.g.,psychotic disorder due to Lewy body disease, with delusions).
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) If there is evidence of recent or prolonged substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal from a substance or medication that can cause psychotic symptoms on withdrawal, or exposure to a toxin (e.g., LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxication, alcohol withdrawal),a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks) of substance intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance-induced psychotic dis-order, depending on the character, duration, or amount of the substance used. If the clini-cian has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another medical condition and sub-stance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be given.
Psychotic disorder) Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distinguished from a psychotic disorder that is not due to another medical condition (e.g.,schizophrenia, delusional disorder, schizoaffective disorder) or a major depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. In psychotic disorders and in depressive or bipo-lar disorders, with psychotic features, no specific and direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be demonstrated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history of schizophrenia or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that involve voices speaking complex sentences are more characteristic of schizophrenia than of psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. While certain symptoms suggest a medical or toxic etiology (e.g.,visual or olfactory hallucinations, dreamlike quality of delusions [individual as uninvolved observer]), there are no pathognomonic signs or symptoms that unequivocally point clinicians either way. Visual hallucinations are not uncommon in schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, and olfactory hallucinations (e.g., unpleasant smells) are also consistent with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Thus, clinicians should not give undue weight to any one particular hallucination alone when deciding between a psychiatric and a medical cause for psychopathology.

8. Catatonia Associated With AnotherMental Disorder (Catatonia Specifier)
Criteria: A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [exclude if known aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements)
.9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).